USF-2745 Document public utility functions in checkout dropin (#439)
commerce-docs/microsite-commerce-storefront: src/content/docs/dropins/checkout/utilities.mdx

---
title: Checkout utility functions
description: Learn about the utility functions available in the checkout drop-in component's lib folder.
tableOfContents:
  minHeadingLevel: 2
  maxHeadingLevel: 2
---

import Aside from '@components/Aside.astro';
import OptionsTable from '@components/OptionsTable.astro';

This topic provides details and instructions for using the utility functions available in the checkout drop-in component. These functions were moved from the integration layer and are now publicly accessible within the checkout block from `@dropins/storefront-checkout/lib/utils.js`.

<Aside type="note">

> These utility functions are designed to be lightweight, performant, and easy to integrate into your checkout implementation. They handle common programming tasks including DOM manipulation, event handling, cart data processing, form validation, and address transformations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These utility functions are lightweight, performant, and easy to integrate into your checkout implementation. They handle common tasks including DOM manipulation, event handling, cart data processing, form validation, and address transformations.
```

</Aside>

### Quick imports

```ts
import {
  setAddressOnCart,
  estimateShippingCost,
  isVirtualCart,
  isEmptyCart,
  getCartShippingMethod,
  getCartAddress,
  getCartPaymentMethod,
  createFragment,
  createScopedSelector,
  validateForm,
  createMetaTag,
  setMetaTags,
  scrollToElement,
  transformAddressFormValuesToCartAddressInput,
  transformCartAddressToFormValues,
} from '@dropins/storefront-checkout/lib/utils.js';
```

## API Functions

### setAddressOnCart

> The `setAddressOnCart` function creates a debounced handler for setting shipping or billing addresses on the cart. This utility prevents excessive API calls when address data is changing frequently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `setAddressOnCart` function creates a debounced handler for setting shipping or billing addresses on the cart, preventing excessive API calls when address data changes frequently.
```

```ts
export function setAddressOnCart({
  type = 'shipping',
  debounceMs = 0,
  placeOrderBtn,
}: {
  type?: 'shipping' | 'billing';
  debounceMs?: number;
  placeOrderBtn?: RenderAPI;
}): (change: AddressFormChange) => void;
```

<OptionsTable
  compact
  options={[
    ['Parameter', 'Type', 'Req?', 'Description'],
    ['type', 'string', 'No', 'Address type: "shipping" or "billing". Defaults to "shipping".'],
    ['debounceMs', 'number', 'No', 'Milliseconds to debounce API calls. Defaults to 0.'],
    ['placeOrderBtn', 'RenderAPI', 'No', 'Place order button API to manage disabled state.'],
  ]}
/>

### Returns

Returns a function that accepts address form changes and updates the cart accordingly.

<Aside type="note">

> - The place order button is disabled while debounced address updates are in-flight and re-enabled when the last pending call settles.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The **Place Order** button is disabled during debounced address updates and re-enabled when the last pending call completes.
```

</Aside>

### Usage

```ts
import { setAddressOnCart } from '@dropins/storefront-checkout/lib/utils.js';

// Set up debounced shipping address handler
const handleShippingChange = setAddressOnCart({
  type: 'shipping',
  debounceMs: 500,
  placeOrderBtn: placeOrderButtonAPI
});

// Use with form change events
shippingForm.addEventListener('input', (event) => {
  const formData = getFormValues(event.target.form);
  const isValid = validateForm(event.target.form);
  
  handleShippingChange({
    data: formData,
    isDataValid: isValid
  });
});
```

### estimateShippingCost

The `estimateShippingCost` function creates a debounced handler for estimating shipping costs based on address information.

```ts
export function estimateShippingCost({ debounceMs = 0 }): (change: AddressFormChange) => void;
```

<OptionsTable
  compact
  options={[
    ['Parameter', 'Type', 'Req?', 'Description'],
    ['debounceMs', 'number', 'No', 'Milliseconds to debounce API calls. Defaults to 0.'],
  ]}
/>

### Returns

Returns a function that estimates shipping costs when address data changes.

<Aside type="note">

> - When the form becomes valid, the handler returns early and does not trigger estimation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When the form becomes valid, the handler returns early without triggering estimation.
```

  ]}
/>

### Returns

Returns the address object or `null` if no address is set.

### Usage

```ts
import { getCartAddress } from '@dropins/storefront-checkout/lib/utils.js';

const cartData = await getCart();
const shippingAddress = getCartAddress(cartData, 'shipping');
const billingAddress = getCartAddress(cartData, 'billing');

if (shippingAddress) {
  populateAddressForm(shippingAddress);
}
```

### getCartPaymentMethod

The `getCartPaymentMethod` function retrieves the selected payment method from cart data.

```ts
export function getCartPaymentMethod(data: Cart | null): PaymentMethod | null;
```

<OptionsTable
  compact
  options={[
    ['Parameter', 'Type', 'Req?', 'Description'],
    ['data', 'Cart | null', 'Yes', 'The cart data object.'],
  ]}
/>

### Returns

Returns the selected payment method object or `null` if none is selected.

### Usage

```ts
import { getCartPaymentMethod } from '@dropins/storefront-checkout/lib/utils.js';

const cartData = await getCart();
const paymentMethod = getCartPaymentMethod(cartData);

if (paymentMethod) {
  console.log(`Payment method: ${paymentMethod.code}`);
}
```

## DOM and Fragment Functions

### createFragment

> The `createFragment` function creates a DocumentFragment from an HTML string.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `createFragment` function creates a `DocumentFragment` from an HTML string.
```

```ts
export function createFragment(html: string): DocumentFragment;
```

<OptionsTable
  compact
  options={[
    ['Parameter', 'Type', 'Req?', 'Description'],
    ['html', 'string', 'Yes', 'The HTML string to convert to a DocumentFragment.'],
  ]}
/>

### Returns

Returns a DocumentFragment containing the parsed HTML.

### Usage

```ts
import { createFragment } from '@dropins/storefront-checkout/lib/utils.js';

const html = `
  <div class="checkout-step">
    <h2>Payment Information</h2>
    <form class="payment-form">
      <!-- form fields -->
    </form>
  </div>
`;

const fragment = createFragment(html);
document.querySelector('.checkout-container').appendChild(fragment);
```

### createScopedSelector

> The `createScopedSelector` function creates a scoped querySelector function for a DocumentFragment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `createScopedSelector` function creates a scoped `querySelector` function for a DocumentFragment.
```

```ts
export function createScopedSelector(
  fragment: DocumentFragment
): (selector: string) => HTMLElement | null;
```

<OptionsTable
  compact
  options={[
    ['Parameter', 'Type', 'Req?', 'Description'],
    ['fragment', 'DocumentFragment', 'Yes', 'The DocumentFragment to scope the selector to.'],
  ]}
/>

### Returns

Returns a function that queries elements within the given fragment.

### Usage

```ts
import { createFragment, createScopedSelector } from '@dropins/storefront-checkout/lib/utils.js';

const html = `
  <div class="checkout-step">
    <button class="next-btn">Next</button>
    <button class="prev-btn">Previous</button>
  </div>
`;

const fragment = createFragment(html);
const $ = createScopedSelector(fragment);

// Query within the fragment only
const nextButton = $('.next-btn');
const prevButton = $('.prev-btn');

nextButton?.addEventListener('click', handleNext);
```

## Form Functions

### validateForm

> The `validateForm` function validates a form by name and handles validation through form references.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `validateForm` function validates a form by name using form references.
```

// Validate checkout form before submission
const isShippingValid = validateForm('shipping-form', shippingFormRef);
const isBillingValid = validateForm('billing-form', billingFormRef);

if (isShippingValid && isBillingValid) {
  proceedToPayment();
} else {
  showValidationErrors();
}
```

## Meta Functions

### createMetaTag

The `createMetaTag` function creates or updates meta tags in the document head.

```ts
export function createMetaTag(property: string, content: string, type: string): void;
```

<OptionsTable
  compact
  options={[
    ['Parameter', 'Type', 'Req?', 'Description'],
    ['property', 'string', 'Yes', 'The property/name of the meta tag.'],
    ['content', 'string', 'Yes', 'The content value for the meta tag.'],
    ['type', 'string', 'Yes', 'The type of meta tag: "name" or "property".'],
  ]}
/>

### Returns

The function does not return a value; it modifies the document head.

### Usage

```ts
import { createMetaTag } from '@dropins/storefront-checkout/lib/utils.js';

// Set checkout-specific meta tags
createMetaTag('description', 'Complete your purchase securely', 'name');
createMetaTag('og:title', 'Checkout - Your Store', 'property');
```

### setMetaTags

> The `setMetaTags` function sets standard meta tags for a dropin component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `setMetaTags` function sets standard meta tags for a drop-in component.
```

if (errorField) {
  scrollToElement(errorField);
}

// Scroll to next checkout step
const nextStep = document.querySelector('.checkout-step.active');
scrollToElement(nextStep);
```

## Data Transformer Functions

### transformAddressFormValuesToCartAddressInput

The `transformAddressFormValuesToCartAddressInput` function converts form data to cart address input format.

```ts
export const transformAddressFormValuesToCartAddressInput = (
  data: Record<string, any>
): ShippingAddressInput | BillingAddressInput;
```

<OptionsTable
  compact
  options={[
    ['Parameter', 'Type', 'Req?', 'Description'],
    ['data', 'Record<string, any>', 'Yes', 'Form data object containing address information.'],
  ]}
/>

### Returns

Returns a formatted address input object for cart API calls.

### Usage

```ts
import { transformAddressFormValuesToCartAddressInput } from '@dropins/storefront-checkout/lib/utils.js';

// Transform form data for API
const formData = getFormValues(addressForm);
const addressInput = transformAddressFormValuesToCartAddressInput(formData);

// Send to cart API
await setShippingAddress(addressInput);
```

### transformCartAddressToFormValues

> The `transformCartAddressToFormValues` function converts cart address data to form values format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `transformCartAddressToFormValues` function converts cart address data to the form values format.
```
